## 11 Glossary of technical terms

### **A**

*Acronym*

An acronym is a shortened version of a phrase, often taking the first
letters. For example, GIGO is the acronym for 'Garbage in Garbage out'
or WYSIWYG, otherwise known as 'What you see is what you get'.

*Android*

Is een opensourceplatform en besturingssysteem voor mobiele telefoons,
tablet-pcs, koelkasten, camera's en meer, gebaseerd op de Linuxkernel en
het Java-programmeerplatform. Android is het meest verkochte
besturingssysteem op mobiele telefoons \#\#\#\# Amazon Internetwinkel
waar digitale uitgave worden aangeboden in file format .AZW, KF8
\#\#\#\# API Een “application programming interface” is een formele
specificatie van hoe twee software systemen met elkaar kunnen
communiceren. De API is als het ware een technische brug tussen
Applicatie A en Applicatie B. Stel je wil met een (web)applicatie de 10
meest recente tweets van een bepaald Twitter-account ophalen dan kan dit
via de API die Twitter aanbiedt. Door een verzoek naar de API van
Twitter te versturen krijg je via die service een “antwoord” in een
gestructureerd standaardformaat (vaak in een taal als XML of JSON, e.d.)
terug dat gebruikt kan verder verwerkt kan worden. Veel APIs behelzen
ook schrijftoegang, waarbij bestanden of andersoortige objecten
(afbeeldingen, tekst, etc.) van Applicatie A naar Applicatie B verzonden
via de API. \#\#\#\# App Een mobiele applicatie of kortweg app is een
software-applicatie die ontworpen is om te draaien op een smartphone,
tablet of een ander elektronisch handapparaat. Met behulp van apps is
het mogelijk eenvoudig extra functies aan een mobiel apparaat toe te
voegen, zodat deze kunnen worden uitgebreid tot multifunctionele
communicatieapparatuur. (Er wordt onderscheid gemaakt tussen Web app,
Native app en Hybrid app) \#\#\#\# App store Deze onlinewinkel (ook wel
distributieplatform genoemd) is bereikbaar via een app op het apparaat
zelf en vaak ook via een website op een desktop of laptop. Elk mobiel
besturingssysteem heeft een eigen winkel, zoals App Store (Apple),
Google Play, Windows Phone Store en BlackBerry App World, Kindle store
Amazon. Apps voor het ene besturingssysteem kunnen niet zomaar op een
ander systeem geïnstalleerd worden. Dit betekent dat per
besturingssysteem een app ontwikkeld moet worden. De kosten voor de
ontwikkeling zijn mede hierdoor relatief hoog. Er is geen
internetverbinding nodig (behalve voor updates). \#\#\#\# azw (.azw)
Amazon word, file format used by the Amazon Kindle e-Book reader


*Animated GIF*

A GIF2 graphic file, which consists of two or more images shown in a
timed sequence to give the effect of motion.

*API*

Application Program Interface. An interface between the operating system
and application programs that specifies how the two communicate with
each other.

*Applet*

An Applet is a small program that is downloaded from a web page and
executed by browser software. Also, an HTML tag that defines an applet
program.which is written in Java and designed to run on a web page. It
can be used to display scrolling text such as a marquee across the top
of a page or other animations

*ASCII*

American Standard Code for Information Interchange. A standard way to
encode upper and lower case letters in the English alphabet, numbers,
and special characters using only seven bits, and therefore limited to
128 characters.

*AVI*

Audio Video Interleaved. A Microsoft video format where audio and video
coding appears in alternate segments. AVI files will end with an .avi
extension.

*AZW*

AZW is a proprietary format developed by Amazon specifically for the Kindle eBook reader. It has its roots in the MOBI format but has better compression and encryption apart from a few more changes. The AZW format has found its place in many platforms with Kindle reading apps apart from Kindle. But AZW files can only be obtained from the Amazon online bookstore.

### **B**

*Bandwidth*

Literally, the frequency width of a transmission channel in Hertz,
kiloHertz, megaHertz, etc. Often used as an expression of the amount of
data that can be sent through a circuit. The greater the bandwidth, the
greater the amount of data that can travel in a given time period.


*Binary*

A number system using base 2 instead of the usual (human) base 10, which
is normally referred to as the decimal system. Computers use base 2
because they can only recognise two values, 1 or 0. This is simulated
electronically by using a device, such as a switch, which is either on
(1) or off (0). All numbers are represented by combinations of ones and
zeroes, thus the number 9 is represented as 1001, the right-most column
being the units column and the other columns, moving from right to left,
being 2, 4, 8.


*Bit*

Contraction of *binary digit*. A bit is the smallest measurement unit of
computer memory or data transmission speed.

*Bitmap*

A computer graphic which is defined by specifying the colors of dots or
pixels which make up the picture. Also known as raster graphics. Common
types of bitmap graphics are GIF, JPEG, Photoshop, PCX, TIFF, Macintosh
Paint, Microsoft Paint, BMP, PNG, FAX formats, and TGA. The file
extention is .BMT.

*Blog*

Short for web log; usually a chronological record of thoughts, links,
events, or actions posted on the web, a so-called weblog.

*Browser*

Software that will load and display a web page. A browser interprets the
HTML or XML code from the web page files, executes embedded scripts and
programs, provides encryption/decryption for security where needed,
displays graphics (except text-only browsers), plays music and video,
and provides links to related pages. Browsers are based on standards
developed by the World Wide Web Consortium. The major browser software
developers participate in these standards, but each of them also builds
in their own proprietary codes, whether or not they are approved. These
differences in browsers create a challenge for web page developers.

*Byte*

A measurement of computer memory or disc capacity. A byte comprises 8
*bits*.

### **C**


*Cascading Style Sheets (CSS)*

Cascading Style Sheets are a feature of HTML4 that enables a range of
styles for headers, body text, bullet points, links etc., to be
specified for hypertext documents. This makes it possible to set up CSS
file containing a library of styles that are used throughout a website,
thereby facilitating consistency. If a style needs to be changed
throughout a website it only needs to be changed once in the CSS file
and then it will be applied automatically.

*CMS*

Abbreviation for *Content Management System*, a software package that
makes it possible for non-technical users to publish content (text,
images, etc) on a website.

*Compatiblity*

Pieces of hardware and/or software which are capable of being used
together are described as *compatible*.

*Compression*

Compression is a technique to make a file or a data stream smaller for
faster transmission or to take up less storage space. There a number of
programs that will compress files, such as PKZIP, WinZip, Stuffit, gnu
zip, and many more. Files with the following extensions are almost
always compressed files: arc, arj, gz, lha, lhz, taZ, taz, tgz, Z, zip,
and zoo.

*Computer Program*

A set of instructions that the computer carries out in sequence to
perform a given task. Programs are written in English-like programming
languages (e.g. C, Pascal, JAVA, C++) , and are then converted into
binary machine instructions via a compiler or an interpreter.



### **D**

*Data*

Strictly speaking the plural of "datum",but now usually considered as a
collective noun in the singular, with the plural form "data items" or
"items of data". Data is information in a form which can be processed by
a computer. It is usually distinguished from a *computer program*, which
is a set of instructions that a computer carries out. Data can be text
or sets of figures on which a computer program operates.

*Device*

A general term for a tool or machine that performs specific tasks. 


*Desktop Publishing* 

DTP is term used for the creation of publications by a local personal computer and a local printer.

*Directory*

A location on a disc containing a group of *subdirectories* and *files* 
grouped together for organisational purposes. The term is used
synonymously with Folder, which has become a more common term since the
introduction of Windows'. Subdirectories are sometimes referred to as
"child directories" of the "parent directory". The topmost directory on
a computer, which is the parent of all directories on the disc, is known
as the *root directory* and usually has the *pathname* C:\\


*DOS*

Disk Operating System

*Dpi*

Abbreviation for Dots Per Inch. A measure of the of the quality of
output, i.e. the number of dots per square inch produced by a *printer*
or *scanner*, also referred to as its *resolution*. A resolution of at
least 300 dpi is considered reasonable for the production of
good-quality output by a printer and 1200 dpi by a scanner. But modern
printers and scanners can produce many more dots per square inch. The
resolution of a scanner may also be expressed by two numbers representing the number of horizontal dots and of vertical dots respectively e.g. 1200 x 2400. 

*Drm*

Digital rights management is a class of technologies that are used by hardware manufacturers, publishers, copyright holders, and individuals with the intent to control the use of digital content and devices after sale.

### **E**

*Ebook*

A general term for a book or text that is stored and presented on an electronic device 

*E-ink*

Electrophoretic ink, a system in which small particles are
electrostatically charged in such a way they can become black or white
and remain so. Hence, electricity is in fact only used by refreshing the
page, which reduces considerably the power consumption and makes it an
ideal technology for long reading. The resolution of the stable screen
is very high. A disadvantage is that, like paper, the presentation does
not allow motion pictures or animations.

*Epub*

EPUB (short for electronic publication) is a free and open ebook standard by the International Digital Publishing Forum . Files have the extension .epub.
EPUB is designed for reflowable content, meaning that an EPUB reader can optimize text for a particular display device. EPUB also supports fixed-layout content. The format is intended as a single format that publishers and conversion houses can use in-house, as well as for distribution and sale.


*Encryption*

A system of coding that helps prevent access to private information on
computer networks or on the Web.

### **F**

*FAQ*

Abbreviation for Frequently Asked Question.

*File*

A *file* in computer jargon can be used to describe many different
things. It may be a Computer Program, a document file created with a
Word-processor, an image file, an audio file, a video file, etc. Think
of it in the same way as you would think of a file in a filing cabinet.
A file has a name that describes what it is, and the file is stored in a
place where you can easily find it.

*File extension*

One popular method used by many operating systems, including Windows,
Mac OS is to determine the format of a file based on the end of its
name—the letters following the final period. This portion of the
filename is known as the filename extension. For example, HTML documents
are identified by names that end with .html (or .htm), and GIF images by
.gif. In the past names were limited to an eight-character identifier
and a three-character extension. There are only a limited number of
three-letter extensions, so, often any given extension might be linked
to more than one program. Many formats still use three-character
extensions even though modern operating systems and application programs
no longer have this limitation. Since there is no standard list of
extensions, more than one format can use the same extension, which can
confuse both the operating system and users.

*File format*

A file format is a standard way that information is encoded for storage
in a computer file. It specifies how bits are used to encode information
in a digital storage medium. File formats may be either proprietary or
free and may be either unpublished or open. A specific file format
demands specific programs to read.


*Flat text*

Text composed with simple ASCII or Unicode characters only.
 
*Freemium*

Freemium is a pricing strategy by which a product or service (typically a digital offering such as software, media, games or web services) is provided free of charge, but money (premium) is charged for proprietary features, functionality, or virtual goods.

### **G**

*GIF*

Abbreviation for Graphic Interchange Format. A file format used for
storing simple graphics. GIF files use a palette of 256 colours, which
makes them practical for almost all graphics except photographs.
Generally, GIF files should be used for logos, line drawings, icons,
etc, i.e. images that don't contain a rich range of colours. A GIF file
containing a small number of colours tends to be quite small, but it
will be big if the image has a wide range of colours, e.g. a
photograph.GIF files are commonly used for storing images on the Web.
GIF files are also suitable for storing animated (i.e. moving) images.

*GitHub*

Collaboration platform, code review, and code management for open
source and private projects.


### **H**

*HTML*

Abbreviation for Hypertext Markup Language, structuring language based
on SGML. The coding system used for creating pages on the World Wide
Web. HTML enables the author to control how the page appears and to
insert Hypertext links within one Web page or to other pages anywhere on
the Web.

*HTTP*

Abbreviation for Hypertext Transfer Protocol. The transfer method
(*protocol*) used by the World Wide Web to transmit and receive Web
pages.

*Hyperlink*

A contraction of hypertext link, the essence of Hypertext and the HTML
language used for creating pages on the World Wide Web. In a Web
document a hyperlink can be a sequence of letters or an image. By
clicking on the area designated as a hyperlink by the person who created
the Web page, it is possible to jump quickly to another part of the
page, a different page on the same website, or to a completely different
website.

*Hypertext*

A system for the non-sequential presentation of text, the fundamental
concept of the World Wide Web, whereby the user can jump from one part
of a text to another, from one Web page to another, or from one website
to another, by clicking on highlighted (and usually underlined)
hyperlinks. The concept of hypertext predates the Web by many years.

### **I**

*iBooks*

Is proprietary software of Apple Inc to handle ebooks in their own cloed system.

*Icon*

A small symbol or picture used in a Graphical User Interface (GUI). The
icons on the computer screen represent programs or files, e.g. a picture
of a painter's palette might represent a program used for drawing and
editing pictures, and a picture of a book with a question mark on its
cover might represent the text of a manual or a help file.


*Interface*

An interface in computer jargon is a connection between two systems. It
can be Hardware or Software. It may take the form of a plug, cable or
socket, or all three, for example where a Printer or Scanner is
connected to a computer, and then it's a hardware interface. There are
also software interfaces that enable one program to link with another,
passing across data and variables. The term interface, also known as
user interface, also describes the software that is used to enable human
beings to communicate with a computer.


*iOS*

Computer operating system of Apple computers.

*Ipad*

Tablet computer made by Apple inc.

*iPod*

The name of a portable (mobile) Media Player designed and marketed by Apple inc.



### **J**

*Java*

Java is a high level programming language. It is useful for creating
small web applications and applets for use as part of a web page.

*Javascript*

JavaScript is a scripting language originally developed by Netscape
mainly for use as code within a web page.


*JPEG or JPG*

Abbreviation for Joint Photographic Expert Group. Pronounced "Jaypeg". A
file format used for storing images. The JPEG/JPG format uses a palette
of millions of colours and is primarily intended for photographic
images. The internal compression algorithm of the JPEG/JPG format,
unlike the GIF format, actually throws out superfluous information,
which is why JPEG/JPG files containing photographic images end up
smaller than GIF files containing photographic images. If you store an
image, say, of a flag containing just three colours in JPEG/JPG format
it may end up bigger than a GIF file containing the same image, but not
necessarily a lot bigger - it depends on the type and range of colours
it contains. JPEG/JPG files containing photographic images are normally
smaller than GIF files containing photographic images.

### **K**

*KF8*

Is Amazons new Kindle Format 8 used on the Kindle Fire using the Android 2.3. operating system. Kindle devices do not support the EPUB file format used by many other e-book readers. 

### **L**


*LaTex*

A word-processor and document preparation program package often used in scientific and engineering environments.

*LCD*

Abbreviation for Liquid Crystal Display. A technology used for producing
a type of flat panel computer display screen, which is replacing the
older type of Cathode Ray Tube display screen. A more advanced form of
technology for producing flat panel display screens is known as TFT
(Thin Film Transistor). LCD and TFT screens are also used in digital
cameras and camcorders.

*Linux*

Unix-type Operating System. Linux was originally created by Linus Torvalds with the assistance of developers around the world. The Source
Code for Linux is open source and hence freely available to everyone.

### **M**

*Macro*

A sort of mini-program that can be incorporated into other programs,
comprising a series of keystrokes that you may wish to use over and over
again. Hence a macro is a series of commands and instructions that you group
together as a single command to accomplish a task automatically. 

*Mark-up Language*

A system of flat text codes positioned around a part of text in order to further define the usages of this text.


*Metadata*

The terms used in a Mark-up language to define a certain feature of a part of text.


*Mobipocket*

Mobipocket is a French company that produces
Mobipocket Reader software, one of the standard for ebooks.


### **N**


### **O**

*OEBPS*

Open eBook Publication Structure (OEBPS). Also a directory name in the epub program.


*Open source*

The term “open source” software is used by some people to mean more or less the same category as free software. It is not exactly the same class of software: they accept some licenses that we consider too restrictive, and there are free software licenses they have not accepted. However, the differences in extension of the category are small: nearly all free software is open source, and nearly all open source software is free.

### **P**

*PDA*

Portable digital assistant 

*PDF*

Portable Document Format. This is a proprietary file type
created by Adobe inc. that allows fully formatted, documents to be
transmitted across the Internet and viewed on any computer that has
A

*Platform*

Often used as an alternative term for a computer system, including both
the hardware and the software. Essentially this term describes something
that is used to build something else. The term *platform-independent* -
used to describe software - means that the software can be run on any
computer.


*Print-on-Demand*
Print on demand (POD) is a digital printing technology in which a book or other publication is printed in the amount one needs it. The POD model flies in the face of traditional printing, where large quantities of books are produced in initial print runs to reduce costs prior to distribution. The sales of online books and e-books facilitate POD and eliminate the need for hard copy book displays. POD has also changed the publishing industry by reducing the need for traditional publishing houses, allowing authors to self-publish at very low costs. Print on demand is sometimes called publish on demand.

*Program*

The American spelling is standard in computer jargon, enabling a useful
distinction to be made in British English between a *computer program*
and a *programme* in the sense of a *programme of study*. A talk with
the title "Turning programmes into programs" (or maybe it was the other
way round) was presented by a British Council officer at the annual
TESOL conference in the USA in 1987 - which puzzled the American
audience but made sense to the British participants.

*Protocol*

In Internet terminology protocol usually refers to a set of rules that
define an exact format for communication between systems. For example
the HTTP protocol defines the format for communication between Web
browsers and Web server.

### **Q**


### **R**

*Reflowable*

A reflowable document is a type of electronic document that can adapt
its presentation to the output device.



*RTF*

Abbreviation for Rich Text Format, an alternative way of storing a
document created with a MS-Word-processor. RTF-formatted files can be
moved relatively easily between different computer systems. RTF format
is also recommended when transmitting an Attachment by Email as it is
much safer than the Microsoft Word formats, which can harbour Word Macro
viruses. RTF files preserve most of the formatting contained in
DOC-formatted files.

### S

*SDK*

Software development kit


*Streaming*

Playing audio or video in real time from a website. In order to play
streaming multimedia files you need a specific Plug-in program that
links in with your Browser and plays the file as it is transmitted
rather than downloading it to your computer first. Streaming requires a
Broadband connection to the Internet since multimedia files are not
stored on your computer but played in a continuous stream direct from
the computer where they are stored.

### **T**

*Tablet Computer*

A tablet computer is compact portable computer that makes use of a
Touchscreen instead of a keyboard for typing and running applications.


*Tag*

Tags are small alpha-numeric indicators around a word or part of text to
define the role and/or function of that text. It is an essential tool in
XML and HTML.

Tagging is the activity of adding tags.

*Text editor*

A computer program that allow the manipulation of text.

*Tumblog*
A tumblog is similar to a blog. Whereas the full name for a blog is "Web log," the full name for a tumblog is a "tumble log." It is named *tumble* because it is designed for posting quick snippets instead of long articles.

### *U*

*Unicode*

The Unicode Worldwide Character Standard, a major extension of ASCII,  is a character coding system
designed to support the interchange, processing, and display of the
written texts of the diverse languages of the modern world. In addition,
it supports classical and historical texts of many written languages:
http://www.unicode.org.


*Unix*

An Operating System widely used on large computer systems in
corporations and universities, on which many Web servers are hosted. A
PC version of Unix, called Linux, is becoming increasingly popular as an
alternative to Windows.

### *V*



### *W*



*Word-processor*

A computer application that allows the writing, storing and manipulating of text as well as pictures and other embellishments to text. Word-processor combine more and more user aids, such as spelling checkers, but are notorious idiosyncratic and in most cases unsystematic in their structure. Direct translation between the most common word-processor MS-word in e.g. Epub is impossible and is the reason for this toolkit.

*World Wide Web*

Usually referred to simply as the Web. This is the most powerful and
fastest growing Internet service. The World Wide Web was the brainchild
of Tim Berners-Lee, who in 1989 invented the HTML coding language that
is the basis of the Web. The Web became a public service in 1993. It is
a huge collection of resources of information, including learning
materials, which is accessed by means of a computer program known as a
Browser. The World Wide Web is only part of the Internet, but many
people treat both terms as synonyms.


### **X**

*XML*

Abbreviation for eXtensible Markup Language. XML is a specification
emanating from the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) that allows Web
designers to create their own language for displaying documents on the
Web. XML is an extension to the standard language for creating Web
pages, HTML, and makes it possible to create websites containing more
complex interactivity.

*XHTML*

XHTML (Extensible HyperText Markup Language) is a family of XML markup languages that mirror or extend versions of the widely used Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), the language in which Web pages are written.

### Y

### Z

*Zebras*

Zebras are several species of African equids united by their
distinctive black and white stripes. Their stripes come in different
patterns, unique to each individual. They are generally social animals
that live in small harems to large herds. Unlike their closest
relatives, horses and donkeys, zebras have never been truly
domesticated.
