# Overview 

## Why this toolkit

This toolkit aims to provide a practical guide on how to develop ePubs
for publishers as well as for anyone else interested in this subject
matter. It will give insight into the preconditions of digital
publishing, providing open-source tools where possible, and allowing
publishers of the arts and culture sector to navigate the diverse and
complex landscape of digital publishing in a more informed way.

## Whom is this toolkit written for?

You may be a publisher, an experienced programmer, a designer or someone
who is just starting out. You probably identify with or work in the arts
fields. You may be hoping to gain answers, knowledge, get tips, and
consult various resources. This toolkit intends to provide them all. The
overall focus is on pragmatic solutions for digital publishers within
the art and cultural sector. No prior knowledge of creating an ePub is
required â€“ with that said, a healthy familiarity of a variety of
computer software is helpful, as is the willingness to learn and the
inquisitive curiosity to look beyond this book for certain answers. This
publication is not a tutorial on how to make an epublication, it just
gives you some guidance on where to start and how to make a first
attempt to make a digital publication.

## What culture shock to expect 

As mentioned before "You must change your life". So you might expect a
bit of a culture shock reading through this document. If electronic
publishing will merely remain an afterthought in the production chain
and product portfolio, the change might be light. If electronic
publishing will become just as important as print, the change may be
radical. What this means is that if you want to make visual digital
publications, you should be willing to change your current way of
working and gradually get used to the offered but less common
alternatives.

## How to use this toolkit (check chpt \#s)

This toolkit will help you to develop ePubs, specifically art and design
publications, that overall make more use of different fonts, graphics
and lay-out then novels. Chapter 3 will give a general introduction of
these publications and sketches out various scenarios to develop ePubs.
Issues and opportunities of going electronic will be discussed, as well
as strengths and limitations of particular, reader hardware and
software, file formats and lastly distribution platforms. Chapters 4
offers a practical, how-to guidance for workflows (structured and per
scenario) and designing ePubs for the various scenarios addressed
earlier in chapter 3. Chapter 5 illustrates the concepts with concrete
examples from the Digital Publishing Toolkit program.

## Who worked on this toolkit

This publication is part of the Digital Publishing Toolkit research
program, based on recommendations from practical experiences throughout
the collaboration with four Dutch art, design and research publishers.
Thus, all disciplines were represented from publisher to developer to
designer.
