# Futurology

Where will e-publishing be in 2020?




## Reading technology 

Advantages and disadvantages will remain the same: affordability and portability of whole libraries vs. independence from electricity and visual-tacticle advantages of paper books.

Improvement of e-paper: color e-paper, flexible e-paper

4K displays for mobile devices will push display resolution

possible anti-cloud/anti-obsolescence backlash

## Reading culture 

Mainstream of publishing will remain in traditional textual formats. Reader technology is now good enough to allow pleasant on-screen reading.

Foreseeable: generic forms of publication (such as the paperback) will slowly migrate to electronic, paper publishing will become more visually and tactile oriented. 



## Publishing culture

Likely: switch from individual product retail to rental/subscription model. Subscription to complete libraries with unlimited access to media within the rental period. (Examples: Netflix, Spotify, Adobe Creative Cloud, JSTOR). 




###NOTES / IDEAS
<!-- By Joost-->
Que Sera, Sera (Whatever Will Be, Will Be), is the never ending question
for electronic publishing of art books as well. In art books we try to
describe, show, analyse and collect works of art. These works can be
made of everything, but more often than not they deal with tactile
objects, paintings, drawings, sculptures, etc, etc. In many books these
works are reproduced and discussed. But writing itself is also an art
form and the mutual interaction between texts and tactile objects
becomes more and more integrated. In the 20s and 30s of the previous
century collages became very popular. Here texts, newspaper clippings,
photographs and any other expressions, mostly on a paper substrate were
put together to obtain a new artwork. In an electronic environment we
transcend this collage technique into a new substrate. But now enormous
range of novel opportunities for creative expression becomes possible.
As we showed above in this booklet, gluing, dissecting and endless
reorganising enables us to create new works that can express themselves
differently in different technological environments as well as tailored
to the readersâ€™s desire of the moment of consumption. Electronic
publishing becomes like a gigantic fruit salad bar, where the end user
is able to or fill her own plate or to make a choice between prepared
combinations. This not the same as blending all ingredients into one
smoothie, which is an end phase from where no way back is possible.
