Que Sera, Sera (Whatever Will Be, Will Be), is the never ending question
for electronic publishing of art books as well. In art books we try to
describe, show, analyse and collect works of art. These works can be
made of everything, but more often than not they deal with tactile
objects, paintings, drawings, sculptures, etc, etc. In many books these
works are reproduced and discussed. But writing itself is also an art
form and the mutual interaction between texts and tactile objects
becomes more and more integrated. In the 20s and 30s of the previous
century collages became very popular. Here texts, newspaper clippings,
photographs and any other expressions, mostly on a paper substrate were
put together to obtain a new artwork. In an electronic environment we
transcend this collage technique into a new substrate. But now enormous
range of novel opportunities for creative expression becomes possible.
As we showed above in this booklet, gluing, dissecting and endless
reorganising enables us to create new works that can express themselves
differently in different technological environments as well as tailored
to the readersâ€™s desire of the moment of consumption. Electronic
publishing becomes like a gigantic fruit salad bar, where the end user
is able to or fill her own plate or to make a choice between prepared
combinations. This not the same as blending all ingredients into one
smoothie, which is an end phase from where no way back is possible.
