## [Glossary of technical terms] (glossary.html)

### **A**

*Acronym*

An acronym is a shortened version of a phrase, often taking the first
letters. For example, GIGO is the acronym for 'Garbage in Garbage out'
or WYSIWYG, otherwise known as 'What you see is what you get'.

*Adware*

Any software which serves banner ads or pop-up ads to you while in use.
It is sometimes installed in freeware or shareware which you download
from the nets, and provides one more channel for advertisers to reach
you. Some adware will also track your files, net usage, and software and
report it back to advertisers to help them channel relevant ads to you.

*Aliasing, anti-aliasing*

Pictures on your computer monitor are made up of square [pixel][]. When
the edge of a solid colored object in a GIF image is a diagonal or
curved line, and it is displayed against a contrasting color, the edges
appear jagged, like stair steps. This jagged appearance is called
aliasing. The jagged appearance can be softened by filling in adjacent
pixels with intermediate colors between the object and the background.
This softening of the edges is called anti-aliasing. Software like
PhotoShop can apply anti-aliasing for you automatically.

One problem with anti-aliasing GIF images is that it increases the
number of colors used, necessarily increasing the file size. You must
decide whether quick loading or smoothed edges serves your needs better.

*Algorithm*

This is the name given to a "defined set of steps that can be used to
complete a task". For example there are 'algorithms' worked out for
sorting a list efficiently. A computer programmer can buy a book of
algorithms so they not need to re-invent the wheel when they have to
code for a job that has already been worked out. Having bought the book,
they would look up the problem of 'How to sort a list' and a good book
would tell them a number of ways to do this. Algorithms are not computer
code,

#### Android

Is een opensourceplatform en besturingssysteem voor mobiele telefoons,
tablet-pcs, koelkasten, camera's en meer, gebaseerd op de Linuxkernel en
het Java-programmeerplatform. Android is het meest verkochte
besturingssysteem op mobiele telefoons \#\#\#\# Amazon Internetwinkel
waar digitale uitgave worden aangeboden in file format .AZW, KF8
\#\#\#\# API Een “application programming interface” is een formele
specificatie van hoe twee software systemen met elkaar kunnen
communiceren. De API is als het ware een technische brug tussen
Applicatie A en Applicatie B. Stel je wil met een (web)applicatie de 10
meest recente tweets van een bepaald Twitter-account ophalen dan kan dit
via de API die Twitter aanbiedt. Door een verzoek naar de API van
Twitter te versturen krijg je via die service een “antwoord” in een
gestructureerd standaardformaat (vaak in een taal als XML of JSON, e.d.)
terug dat gebruikt kan verder verwerkt kan worden. Veel APIs behelzen
ook schrijftoegang, waarbij bestanden of andersoortige objecten
(afbeeldingen, tekst, etc.) van Applicatie A naar Applicatie B verzonden
via de API. \#\#\#\# App Een mobiele applicatie of kortweg app is een
software-applicatie die ontworpen is om te draaien op een smartphone,
tablet of een ander elektronisch handapparaat. Met behulp van apps is
het mogelijk eenvoudig extra functies aan een mobiel apparaat toe te
voegen, zodat deze kunnen worden uitgebreid tot multifunctionele
communicatieapparatuur. (Er wordt onderscheid gemaakt tussen Web app,
Native app en Hybrid app) \#\#\#\# App store Deze onlinewinkel (ook wel
distributieplatform genoemd) is bereikbaar via een app op het apparaat
zelf en vaak ook via een website op een desktop of laptop. Elk mobiel
besturingssysteem heeft een eigen winkel, zoals App Store (Apple),
Google Play, Windows Phone Store en BlackBerry App World, Kindle store
Amazon. Apps voor het ene besturingssysteem kunnen niet zomaar op een
ander systeem geïnstalleerd worden. Dit betekent dat per
besturingssysteem een app ontwikkeld moet worden. De kosten voor de
ontwikkeling zijn mede hierdoor relatief hoog. Er is geen
internetverbinding nodig (behalve voor updates). \#\#\#\# azw (.azw)
Amazon word, file format used by the Amazon Kindle e-Book reader

*Anchor*

An 'anchor' is a specific location within a HTML-web page that can be
jumped to by clicking on a hyperlink.

*Animated GIF*

A [GIF][pixel] graphic file, which consists of two or more images shown
in a timed sequence to give the effect of motion.

*API*

Application Program Interface. An interface between the operating system
and application programs that specifies how the two communicate with
each other.

*Applet*

An Applet is a small program that is downloaded from a web page and
executed by [browse][pixel]r oftware. Also, an HTML tag that defines an
applet program.which is written in Java and designed to run on a web
page. It can be used to display scrolling text such as a marquee across
the top of a page or other animations

*ASCII*

American Standard Code for Information Interchange. A standard way to
encode upper and lower case letters in the English alphabet, numbers,
and special characters using only seven bits, and therefore limited to
128 characters.

*AVI*

Audio Video Interleaved. A Microsoft video format where audio and video
coding appears in alternate segments. AVI files will end with an .avi
extension.

### **B**

*Bandwidth*

Literally, the frequency width of a transmission channel in Hertz,
kiloHertz, megaHertz, etc. Often used as an expression of the amount of
data that can be sent through a circuit. The greater the bandwidth, the
greater the amount of data that can travel in a given time period.

*Baud*

Rate of transmission speed in a signal - the number of changes of state,
such as voltage or frequency, per second in a signal. Named for the
French teleprinter inventor Baudot. In simplest systems, it is
synonymous with bits per second. In more complex systems, a baud may
include more than one bit.

*Bit*

Contraction of *binary digit*. A bit is the smallest measurement unit of
computer memory or data transmission speed.

*Bitmap*

A computer graphic which is defined by specifying the colors of dots or
pixels which make up the picture. Also known as raster graphics. Common
types of bitmap graphics are GIF, JPEG, Photoshop, PCX, TIFF, Macintosh
Paint, Microsoft Paint, BMP, PNG, FAX formats, and TGA. The file
extention is .BMT.

*Blog*

Short for web log; usually a chronological record of thoughts, links,
events, or actions posted on the web.

*Browser*

Software that will load and display a web page. A browser interprets the
HTML or XML code from the web page files, executes embedded scripts and
programs, provides encryption/decryption for security where needed,
displays graphics (except text-only browsers), plays music and video,
and provides links to related pages. Browsers are based on standards
developed by the World Wide Web Consortium. The major browser software
developers participate in these standardss, but each of them also builds
in their own proprietary codes, whether or not they are approved. These
differences in browsers create a challenge for web page developers.

*Byte*

A measurement of computer memory or disc capacity. A byte comprises 8
*bits*.

#### 

### **C**

*CAD/CAM*

Abbreviations for Camputer Aided Design / Computer Aided Manufacturing.
A process of drafting, designing and manufacturing with the aid of a
computer. CAD enables the user to manipulate drawings, including 3D
drawings, and viewing them from a variety of angles. CAM is a general
term for computer support during the manufacturing process.

*Cascading Style Sheets (CSS)*

Cascading Style Sheets are a feature of [HTML][pixel] that enables a
range of styles for headers, body text, bullet points, links etc., to be
specified for hypertext documents. This makes it possible to set up CSS
file containing a library of styles that are used throughout a website,
thereby facilitating consistency. If a style needs to be changed
throughout a website it only needs to be changed once in the CSS file
and then it will be applied automatically.

*CMS *

Abbreviation for *Content Management System*, a software package that
makes it possible for non-technical users to publish content (text,
images, etc) on a website.

*Compatiblity*

Pieces of hardware and/or software which are capable of being used
together are described as *compatible*.

*Compression*

Compression is a technique to make a file or a data stream smaller for
faster transmission or to take up less storage space. There a number of
programs that will compress files, such as PKZIP, WinZip, Stuffit, gnu
zip, and many more. Files with the following extensions are almost
always compressed files: arc, arj, gz, lha, lhz, taZ, taz, tgz, Z, zip,
and zoo.

*Computer Program*

A set of instructions that the computer carries out in sequence to
perform a given task. Programs are written in English-like programming
languages (e.g. C, Pascal, JAVA, C++) , and are then converted into
binary machine instructions via a compiler or an interpreter.

*Cookie*

A cookie is a short file put on your system by a web page when the user
visits a website for the first time. It includes information about your
usage and facilitates the current interaction. For example, it may
include the information that you have logged into a passworded area
already in the current session and don't need a second password check.
There are many uses for cookies, they may be erased at the end of a
session or retained until the next session, and they may be encrypted or
in plain text. If retained, the next time that the user visits that
site, the information in the cookie is sent back to the site so that the
site can tailor what it presents to the user, e.g. tastes in music or
shopping habits.

### **D**

*Data*

Strictly speaking the plural of "datum",but now usually considered as a
collective noun in the singular, with the plural form "data items" or
"items of data". Data is information in a form which can be processed by
a computer. It is usually distinguished from a *computer program*, which
is a set of instructions that a computer carries out. Data can be text
or sets of figures on which a computer program operates.

#### Device

Is een elektronisch handapparaat zoals: smartphone, tablet-pc, phablet,
personal digital assistant (pda), mobiele telefoon, draagbare
spelcomputer (PlayStation Portable, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Vita).
\#\#\#\# Devices Tablets: iPad, Androids, Kindle Fire. Smartphones:
iPhone, Blackberry… Desktops \#\#\#\# DRM Digital Rights Management is
technologie die digitaal opererende uitgevers in staat stelt om het
gebruik en verbruik van hun auteursrechtelijke beschermde materiaal te
controleren. Als zodanig is de technologie omstreden, de technologie zit
veelal de betalende gebruiker in de weg en vormt een belemmering voor
het vrij gebruik van gekochte digitale goederen. Een MP3 of EPUB
beveiligd met een specifiek soort DRM werkt bijvoorbeeld alleen op
apparaat X van fabrikant Y en is niet vrij te transporteren naar andere
apparaten zonder extra ingrijpen (bijvoorbeeld het kraken van de
beveiliging).

*Binary*

A number system using base 2 instead of the usual (human) base 10, which
is normally referred to as the decimal system. Computers use base 2
because they can only recognise two values, 1 or 0. This is simulated
electronically by using a device, such as a switch, which is either on
(1) or off (0). All numbers are represented by combinations of ones and
zeroes, thus the number 9 is represented as 1001, the right-most column
being the units column and the other columns, moving from right to left,
being 2, 4, 8.

*Directory*

A location on a disc containing a group of *files*and *subdirectories*
grouped together for organisational purposes. The term is used
synonymously with Folder, which has become a more common term since the
introduction of Windows'. Subdirectories are sometimes referred to as
"child directories" of the "parent directory". The topmost directory on
a computer, which is the parent of all directories on the disc, is known
as the *root directory* and usually has the *pathname* C:\\

*Dithering*

The technique of combining dots of primary colours to give the
appearance of intermediate colours. Dots are combined in a square area,
known as a *dither matrix,* to simulate a dot of an intermediate colour.

*DOS*

Disk Operating System

*Dot Matrix Printer *

An older type of printer that works by firing sets of pins in different
combinations at an ink ribbon located against a sheet of paper. Such
printers produce text that looks "ragged". Laser printers and ink-jet
printers are now much more common..

*Dpi*

Abbreviation for Dots Per Inch. A measure of the of the quality of
output, i.e. the number of dots per square inchproduced by a *printer*
or *scanner*, also referred to as its *resolution*. A resolution of at
least 300 dpi is considered reasonable for the production of
high-quality output by a printer and 1200 dpi by a scanner, but modern
printers and scanners can produce many more dots per square inch. The
resolution of a scanner may also be expressed by two numbers. These are
mostly the same, e.g. 1200 x 1200, but you may also see 1200 x 2400,
which means that the number of horizontal dots is different from the
number of vertical dots

### **E **

#### ebook

Is een verzamelnaam voor digitale documenten die weergegeven kunnen
worden op een e-reader evenals op beeldschermen van computers en
smartphones. \#\#\#\# EPUB Electronic publication is een vrij en open
e-bookformaat dat ontwikkeld werd door het International Digital
Publishing Forum (IDPF). EPUB wordt soms ook wel eens aangeduid als
ePub, ePUB, EPub of gewoon epub, maar de voorkeur van de maker is EPUB.
EPUB is ontworpen voor reflowable content. \#\#\#\# e-reader Is een
apparaat waarmee men digitale teksten kan lezen. De twee voornaamste
vormen van digitale teksten op een e-reader zijn het e-book en de
e-paper, als equivalenten van respectievelijk het boek en de krant.

*E-ink*

*Encryption*

A system of coding that helps prevent access to private information on
computer networks or on the Web.

### **F**

*FAQ*

Abbreviation for Frequently Asked Question.

*File*

A *file* in computer jargon can be used to describe many different
things. It may be a Computer Program, a document file created with a
Word-processor, an image file, an audio file, a video file, etc. Think
of it in the same way as you would think of a file in a filing cabinet.
A file has a name that describes what it is, and the file is stored in a
place where you can easily find it.

*File extension*

One popular method used by many operating systems, including Windows,
Mac OS is to determine the format of a file based on the end of its
name—the letters following the final period. This portion of the
filename is known as the filename extension. For example, HTML documents
are identified by names that end with .html (or .htm), and GIF images by
.gif. In the past names were limited to an eight-character identifier
and a three-character extension. There are only a limited number of
three-letter extensions, so, often any given extension might be linked
to more than one program. Many formats still use three-character
extensions even though modern operating systems and application programs
no longer have this limitation. Since there is no standard list of
extensions, more than one format can use the same extension, which can
confuse both the operating system and users.

*File format*

A file format is a standard way that information is encoded for storage
in a computer file. It specifies how bits are used to encode information
in a digital storage medium. File formats may be either proprietary or
free and may be either unpublished or open. A specific file format
demands specific programs to read.

*File Permissions*

Files stored on a computer usually have *permissions* governing which
users are allowed to read, amend or execute them. This is particularly
important in a a school, college or university network environment,
where teachers and lecturers may have the permission to amend certain
files, e.g. documents that they have created, but students are only
allowed to read them. File permissions are usually determined by network
managers.

*Formatting*

The process of preparing a writeable disc for use. Formatting creates a
structure on the disc which enables it to hold data.

### **G**

*GIF*

Abbreviation for Graphic Interchange Format. A file format used for
storing simple graphics. GIF files use a palette of 256 colours, which
makes them practical for almost all graphics except photographs.
Generally, GIF files should be used for logos, line drawings, icons,
etc, i.e. images that don't contain a rich range of colours. A GIF file
containing a small number of colours tends to be quite small, but it
will be big if the image has a wide range of colours, e.g. a
photograph.GIF files are commonly used for storing images on the Web.
GIF files are also suitable for storing animated (i.e. moving) images.

#### *GitHub*

Collaboration programme, code review, and code management for open
source and private projects.

*Graphical User Interface (GUI)*

An Interface1, i.e. a software package, that enables human beings to
control what happens on their computers. A GUI consists of graphical
elements known as icons and enables the user to run programs and to
carry out other operations such as copying information from one
Folder/directory to another, deleting files, etc by clicking on these
icons, opening and shutting windows and dragging and dropping with a
mouse.

### **H**

*Hexadecimal*

 A number system used in computers in which numbers are composed of
combinations of 16 digits, using 0-9 then the letters A-F to represent
10-15. Hex allows binary numbers to be expressed in a more compact and
comprehensible form. For example, 255 = FF (hex) = 11111111 (binary)

#### *HTML*

Abbreviation for Hypertext Markup Language, structuring language based
on SGML. The coding system used for creating pages on the World Wide
Web1. HTML enables the author to control how the page appears and to
insert Hypertext links within one Web page or to other pages anywhere on
the Web.

*HTTP*

Abbreviation for Hypertext Transfer Protocol. The transfer method
(*protocol*) used by the World Wide Web to transmit and receive Web
pages.

*Hyperlink*

A contraction of hypertext link, the essence of Hypertext and the HTML
language used for creating pages on the World Wide Web. In a Web
document a hyperlink can be a sequence of letters or an image. By
clicking on the area designated as a hyperlink by the person who created
the Web page, it is possible to jump quickly to another part of the
page, a different page on the same website, or to a completely different
website.

*Hypertext*

A system for the non-sequential presentation of text, the fundamental
concept of the World Wide Web, whereby the user can jump from one part
of a text to another, from one Web page to another, or from one website
to another, by clicking on highlighted (and usually underlined)
hyperlinks. The concept of hypertext predates the Web by many years.

### **I**

#### IBooks

Is een programma voor het lezen en kopen van e-books, ontwikkeld door
Apple Inc voor besturingssysteem iOS. \#\#\#\# iBookstore Hier is het
mogelijk om boeken e-books te kopen en te downloaden. De boeken in de
winkel zijn in het ePub-formaat opgeslagen. \#\#\#\# Interface Is een
intermediair waarmee twee systemen met elkaar communiceren en zet
informatie van het ene systeem om in begrijpelijke en herkenbare
informatie van een ander systeem. \#\#\#\# iOS Het mobiele
besturingssysteem iOS (vóór juni 2010 iPhone OS) is het
besturingssysteem van de iPhone, iPad, iPod touch en Apple TV. \#\#\#\#
iPad Is een in 2010 geïntroduceerde tablet-pc van het Amerikaanse
elektronicabedrijf Apple. Net zoals de iPhone en de iPod touch bevat de
iPad een multi-touchscherm, waardoor deze met de vingers is te bedienen

*Icon*

A small symbol or picture used in a Graphical User Interface (GUI). The
icons on the computer screen represent programs or files, e.g. a picture
of a painter's palette might represent a program used for drawing and
editing pictures, and a picture of a book with a question mark on its
cover might represent the text of a manual or a help file.

*Ink Jet Printer*

A type of Printer that fire little jets of ink at the page in order to
form the characters and graphics. One of the commonest forms of printers
currently in use and capable of producing high-quality output in black
and white and in full colour.

*Interface*

An interface in computer jargon is a connection between two systems. It
can be Hardware or Software. It may take the form of a plug, cable or
socket, or all three, for example where a Printer or Scanner is
connected to a computer, and then it's a hardware interface. There are
also software interfaces that enable one program to link with another,
passing across data and variables. The term interface, also known as
user interface, also describes the software that is used to enable human
beings to communicate with a computer.

*Ipad*

*iPod*

The name of a portable (mobile) Media Player designed and marketed by
Apple.

*IT(C)*

Abbreviation for Information Technology. Essentially, technology
relating to information processing, i.e. computer technology, The term
IT is rapidly being replaced by ICT in order to reflect the important
role that information technology plays in communications by email, the
Web, satellites and mobile phones.

### **J**

*Java*

Java is a high level programming language. It is useful for creating
small web applications and applets for use as part of a web page.

#### *Javascript*

JavaScript is a scripting language originally developed by Netscape
mainly for use as code within a web page.

Javascript is very popular for common tasks such as validating data
entry forms within a web page before they are submitted to the server.
Javascript can also alter the way a page looks by dynamically changing
CSS format settings within its page.

Another very popular JavaScript linked technology these days is AJAX
which stands for Asynchronous Javascript and XML which is used to update
details on a web page without having to refresh it as you go along.

Recently a lot of interest has arisen in using non-Flash technology for
interactive web pages especially with HTML 5 and to that end a very
popular library called Jquery has come along that offers users a lot of
interactivity without using Flash. Jquery also supports a host of
specialist plug-ins to extend the library.

**JPEG**or **JPG:** Abbreviation for Joint Photographic Expert Group.
Pronounced "Jaypeg". A file format used for storing images. The JPEG/JPG
format uses a palette of millions of colours and is primarily intended
for photographic images. The internal compression algorithm of the
JPEG/JPG format, unlike the GIF format, actually throws out superfluous
information, which is why JPEG/JPG files containing photographic images
end up smaller than GIF files containing photographic images. If you
store an image, say, of a flag containing just three colours in JPEG/JPG
format it may end up bigger than a GIF file containing the same image,
but not necessarily a lot bigger - it depends on the type and range of
colours it contains. JPEG/JPG files containing photographic images are
normally smaller than GIF files containing photographic images.

### **K**

#### *KF8*

Is Amazons new Kindle Format 8 used on the Kindle Fire \#\#\#\# Kindle
Fire Is een tablet van het Amerikaanse bedrijf Amazon. De tablet maakt
gebruik van het besturingssysteem Android 2.3. Kindle devices do not
support the EPUB file format used by many other e-book readers. Instead,
they are designed to use Amazon's own e-book formats: AZW and, in later
devices, KF8. Like EPUB, these formats are intended for reflowable,
richly formatted e-book content. \#\#\#\# Kobo Maakt fysieke e-readers
en applicaties voor iPad, Android, e.d. Tevens is er een Kobo winkel
waar epubs gekocht kunnen worden.

**L**

*LAN*

Abbreviation for Local Area Network. A Network of computers at one site
that provides services to other computers connected to it. A LAN is
usually limited to an immediate area, for example the floor of a
building, a single building or a campus. The most important part of a
LAN is the Server that delivers software to the computers (also known as
workstations or clients) that are connected to it. The server is usually
the most powerful computer in the network Users of computers connected
to a LAN can access their own files remotely and exchange information
with the server and other users connected to the network.

#### LAMP

Is een acroniem voor een set van gratis vrije softwarepakketten, die
vaak samen gebruikt worden om dynamische websites te draaien:

-   Linux, het besturingssysteem;

-   Apache HTTP Server, de webserver;

-   MariaDB of MySQL, het databasemanagementsysteem (of databaseserver);
    of in plaats daarvan PostgreSQL (LAPP) of SQLite (LASP)

-   P for PHP, Perl, en/of Python, de programmeertaal
    \#\#\#\#Linuxkernel Is de kernel (kern) van besturingssystemen uit
    de Linuxfamilie.

*LCD*

Abbreviation for Liquid Crystal Display. A technology used for producing
a type of flat panel computer Display Screen1, which is replacing the
older type of Cathode Ray Tube display screen. A more advanced form of
technology for producing flat panel display screens is known as TFT
(Thin Film Transistor). LCD and TFT screens are also used in digital
cameras and camcorders.

*Linux*

Unix-type Operating System. Linux was originally created by Linus
Torvalds with the assistance of developers around the world. The Source
Code for Linux is open source and hence freely available to everyone.

### **M**

*Macro*

A sort of mini-program that can be incorporated into other programs,
comprising a series of keystrokes that you may wish to use over and over
again. A macro is a series of commands and instructions that you group
together as a single command to accomplish a task automatically. Instead
of manually performing a series of time-consuming, repetitive actions,
you can create and run a single macro - in effect, a custom command that
carries out the task for you. A macro can be saved and called up
whenever you need it.

*Mark-up Language*

*Mashup*

A *mashup* is a Web page that brings together data from two or more Web
services and combines the data into a new application with added
functionality.

#### Mobi

(.mobi, ook wel dotMobi genoemd) is een topleveldomein (TLD). Het
hoofddoel van deze TLD is om websites voor mobiele telefoons beter te
kunnen onderscheiden. Een TLD is het meest rechtse gedeelte in een
internetdomeinnaam, zoals .nl, .org, .gov, .brussels etc. \#\#\#\#
Mobipocket Is a French company incorporated in March 2000 that produces
Mobipocket Reader software, an e-book reader for some personal digital
assistants (PDA), wireless telephones and desktop operating systems.

*MIDI*

Abbreviation for Musical Instrument Digital Interface. A format for
synthesised music. Music in MIDI format is created and played through
the use of synthesisers, unlike "real" music which is normally recorded
in MP31, WMA2 or WAV3 file format.

*Monitor*

The screen on which output from a computer is displayed. Also referred
to as Display Screen.

### N

#### Native app

Een native applicatie is een programma dat specifiek ontwikkeld en
geïmplementeerd is voor het gegeven model, microprocessor of
besturingssysteem. Deze app is geschreven in de programmeertaal (Java
voor Android, Objective-C in combinatie met Cocoa voor iOS) van het
platform waarop de applicatie gelanceerd wordt. De meeste native
applicaties kunnen worden gedownload uit de app store.

### O

#### Objective-C

De programmeertaal waar veel OS X en iOS applicaties in geschreven
worden. De taal heeft de programmeertaal C als basis. Objective-C is
vergelijkbaar met het door Microsoft ontwikkelde C Sharp, ook een
dialect van C. \#\#\#\# Opensource Beschrijft de praktijk die in
productie en ontwikkeling vrije toegang geeft tot de bronmaterialen (de
source) van het eindproduct. De bekendste vorm is opensourcesoftware.

### P

#### PDF

Het Portable Document Format, of kortweg PDF, is sinds ongeveer 1993 een
de facto standaard voor de uitwisseling van elektronische documenten en
formulieren die in hun oorspronkelijke vorm gereproduceerd moeten kunnen
worden. PDF is een universele bestandsindeling waarmee lettertypen,
afbeeldingen en lay-out van elk willekeurig brondocument behouden
blijven, ongeacht het programma of het platform waarmee het document
werd gemaakt, dit in tegenstelling tot bijvoorbeeld HTML. \#\#\#\#
Platform Is in een basis waarop software ontwikkeld wordt. De bekendste
platformen zijn: Java, .NET, Microsoft Windows, Linux, Mac OSX, LAMP.

### Q

### R

#### Reflowable

Bij reflowable content kan de tekst van de boeken voor elke e-reader
geoptimaliseerd worden (dit is de tegenhanger van fixed content)

### S

#### Selfcontained

Een object (applicatie, bestand, e.d.) dat geen externe bronnen nodig
heeft om te opereren en is dus makkelijk te verplaatsen of te kopiëren.
Een EPUB is in principe “selfcontained” als er niet gerefereerd wordt
naar extern aanwezige afbeeldingen of andere media. \#\#\#\# Smartphone
Is een mobiele telefoon die uitgebreidere computermogelijkheden biedt.
Een smartphone kan ook beschouwd worden als een handcomputer die
tegelijk ook een telefoon is. \#\#\#\# Switch Statements Is a type of
selection control mechanism used to allow the value of a variable or
expression to change the control flow of program execution via a
multiway branch. \#\#\#\# Syntax De taalregels/gramatica van een
programmeertaal. Er bestaan specifieke regels voor het aanduiden van
programmeerconcepten (functies, objecten, variabelen, switch statements,
e.d.) die verschillen per programmeertaal.

### T

#### Tablet

Een tablet-pc is een computer die in de hand kan worden gebruikt, zoals
ipad, Samsung Galaxcy Tab en Kindle Fire) \#\#\#\# TLD Is het meest
rechtse gedeelte in een internetdomeinnaam, zoals .nl, .org, .gov,
.brussels etc.

### U

### V

### W

#### Web-app

Is een mobiele versie van een website, waarbij alleen de belangrijkste
onderdelen worden getoond. Deze website wordt speciaal vormgegeven voor
de grootte van het scherm. Daarbij wordt gebruik gemaakt van HTML,
JavaScript en besturingssysteem-afhankelijke functionaliteit.

### X

#### XHTML

(Extensible Hypertext Markup Language) is een opmaaktaal voor vooral
websites, die de functionaliteit heeft van HTML, maar een striktere
syntaxis waardoor deze gemakkelijker verwerkt kunnen worden door een
XML-parser. \#\#\#\# XML XML is a generalized Markup up Language for the
exchange of information. It is generalized in that it allows users to
define their own tags and thus there is a data definition table required
to decode the data.

### Y

### Z

  [pixel]: #
